docs/tutorials/posttraining/rl.md, before:

<!--
 Copyright 2024 Google LLC

 Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
 you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
 You may obtain a copy of the License at

      https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

 Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
 distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
 WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
 See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
 limitations under the License.
 -->

# Reinforcement Learning on single-host TPUs

This tutorial demonstrates step-by-step instructions for setting up the environment and then training the Llama3.1 8B-IT model on the GSM8K math reasoning dataset using a single host TPU-VM such as `v6e-8/v5p-8`.

We utilize two RL algorithms, implemented via the Tunix library, to enhance the model's reasoning capabilities:

* **Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO)**: GRPO is an RL algorithm designed to enhance the reasoning abilities of LLMs. It is a variant of Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) that reduces memory usage by eliminating the need for a separate value function model. GRPO works by generating multiple responses for a given prompt, evaluating these responses using a reward model, and then calculating a relative advantage based on the group's performance to update the policy.

* **Group Sequence Policy Optimization (GSPO)**: GSPO is an RL algorithm that improves training efficiency and performance of LLMs by using sequence-level importance ratios and operations. GSPO defines the importance ratio based on sequence likelihood and performs sequence-level clipping, rewarding, and optimization.

For efficient model inference and response generation during this process, we rely on the vLLM library.

Let's get started!

## Create virtual environment and Install MaxText dependencies
If you have already completed the [MaxText installation](../../install_maxtext.md), you can skip to the next section for post-training dependencies installations. Otherwise, please install `MaxText` using the following commands before proceeding.
```bash
# 1. Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/AI-Hypercomputer/maxtext.git
cd maxtext

# 2. Create virtual environment
export VENV_NAME=<your virtual env name> # e.g., maxtext_venv
pip install uv
uv venv --python 3.12 --seed $VENV_NAME
source $VENV_NAME/bin/activate

# 3. Install dependencies in editable mode
uv pip install -e .[tpu] --resolution=lowest
install_maxtext_github_deps
```

## Install Post-Training dependencies

### From PyPI releases

Next, run the following bash script to get all the necessary installations inside the virtual environment (for e.g., `maxtext_venv`).
This will take few minutes. Follow along the installation logs and look out for any issues!

```
bash tools/setup/setup_post_training_requirements.sh
```

Primarily, it installs `vllm-tpu` which is [vllm](https://github.com/vllm-project/vllm) and [tpu-inference](https://github.com/vllm-project/tpu-inference) and thereby providing TPU inference for vLLM, with unified JAX and PyTorch support.

### From Github

You can also locally git clone [tunix](https://github.com/google/tunix) and install using the instructions [here](https://github.com/google/tunix?tab=readme-ov-file#installation). Similarly install [vllm](https://github.com/vllm-project/vllm) and [tpu-inference](https://github.com/vllm-project/tpu-inference) from source following the instructions [here](https://docs.vllm.ai/projects/tpu/en/latest/getting_started/installation/#install-from-source).

## Setup environment variables

Setup following environment variables before running GRPO/GSPO:

```bash
# -- Model configuration --
export HF_MODEL=<Hugging Face Model> # e.g. 'llama3.1-8b-Instruct'
export MODEL=<MaxText Model> # e.g. 'llama3.1-8b'
export TOKENIZER=<Tokenizer> # e.g. 'meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct'
export HF_TOKEN=<Hugging Face access token>

# -- MaxText configuration --
export BASE_OUTPUT_DIRECTORY=<output directory to store run logs> # e.g., gs://my-bucket/my-output-directory

export RUN_NAME=<name for this run> # e.g., $(date +%Y-%m-%d-%H-%M-%S)
```

## Get your model checkpoint

### Option 1: Using an existing MaxText checkpoint

If you already have a MaxText-compatible model checkpoint, simply set the following environment variable and move on to the next section.
```bash
export MAXTEXT_CKPT_PATH=<gcs path for MaxText checkpoint> # e.g., gs://my-bucket/my-model-checkpoint/0/items
```

### Option 2: Converting from a Hugging Face checkpoint

Otherwise, you can convert a Hugging Face checkpoint to MaxText format using the `src/MaxText/utils/ckpt_conversion/to_maxtext.py` script. This is useful if you have a pre-trained model from Hugging Face that you want to use with MaxText.

First, ensure you have the necessary dependencies installed. Then, run the conversion script on a CPU machine. For large models, it is recommended to use the `--lazy_load_tensors` flag to reduce memory usage during conversion. This command will download the Hugging Face model and convert it to the MaxText format, saving it to the specified GCS bucket.

```bash
python3 -m pip install torch --index-url https://download.pytorch.org/whl/cpu

python3 -m MaxText.utils.ckpt_conversion.to_maxtext src/MaxText/configs/base.yml \
    model_name=${HF_MODEL} \
    hf_access_token=${HF_TOKEN} \
    base_output_directory=${BASE_OUTPUT_DIRECTORY}/${RUN_NAME} \
    scan_layers=True hardware=cpu skip_jax_distributed_system=true

# Example of converting Llama3.1-70B using --lazy_load_tensor=true which uses around 86GB of RAM

python3 -m MaxText.utils.ckpt_conversion.to_maxtext MaxText/configs/base.yml \
    model_name=llama3.1-70b \
    hf_access_token=${HF_TOKEN} \
    base_output_directory=${BASE_OUTPUT_DIRECTORY}/${RUN_NAME} \
    scan_layers=True \
    hardware=cpu skip_jax_distributed_system=true \
    --lazy_load_tensors=true
```

The converted checkpoint will be saved at the following location. Set this environment variable to use it in the following GRPO/GSPO training sessions:
```bash
export MAXTEXT_CKPT_PATH=${BASE_OUTPUT_DIRECTORY}/${RUN_NAME}/0/items
```



## Run GRPO

Run the following command for GRPO:

```
python3 -m src.MaxText.rl.train_rl src/MaxText/configs/rl.yml \
  model_name=${MODEL} \
  tokenizer_path=${TOKENIZER} \
  load_parameters_path=${MAXTEXT_CKPT_PATH} \
  run_name=${RUN_NAME} \
  base_output_directory=${BASE_OUTPUT_DIRECTORY} \
  hf_access_token=${HF_TOKEN}
```

The overview of what this run will do is as follows:

1. We load a policy model and a reference model. Both are copies of the model checkpoint you specified (e.g., `Llama3.1-8b-Instruct`).
2. Evaluate the policy model's performance on GSM8K math reasoning benchmark.
3. Train the policy model using GRPO.
4. Evaluate the policy model's performance on GSM8K math reasoning benchmark after the post-training with GRPO. 

## Run GSPO

Run the following command for GSPO:

```
python3 -m src.MaxText.rl.train_rl src/MaxText/configs/rl.yml \
  model_name=${MODEL} \
  tokenizer_path=${TOKENIZER} \
  load_parameters_path=${MAXTEXT_CKPT_PATH} \
  run_name=${RUN_NAME} \
  base_output_directory=${BASE_OUTPUT_DIRECTORY} \
  hf_access_token=${HF_TOKEN} \
  loss_algo=gspo-token
```

The overview of what this run will do is as follows:

1. We load a policy model and a reference model. Both are copies of the model checkpoint you specified (e.g., `Llama3.1-8b-Instruct`).
2. Evaluate the policy model's performance on GSM8K math reasoning benchmark.
3. Train the policy model using GSPO.
4. Evaluate the policy model's performance on GSM8K math reasoning benchmark after the post-training with GSPO.

Commit message:

Add note for stable release option for RL

docs/tutorials/posttraining/rl.md, after:

<!--
 Copyright 2024 Google LLC

 Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
 you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
 You may obtain a copy of the License at

      https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

 Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
 distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
 WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
 See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
 limitations under the License.
 -->

# Reinforcement Learning on single-host TPUs

This tutorial demonstrates step-by-step instructions for setting up the environment and then training the Llama3.1 8B-IT model on the GSM8K math reasoning dataset using a single host TPU-VM such as `v6e-8/v5p-8`.

We utilize two RL algorithms, implemented via the Tunix library, to enhance the model's reasoning capabilities:

* **Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO)**: GRPO is an RL algorithm designed to enhance the reasoning abilities of LLMs. It is a variant of Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) that reduces memory usage by eliminating the need for a separate value function model. GRPO works by generating multiple responses for a given prompt, evaluating these responses using a reward model, and then calculating a relative advantage based on the group's performance to update the policy.

* **Group Sequence Policy Optimization (GSPO)**: GSPO is an RL algorithm that improves training efficiency and performance of LLMs by using sequence-level importance ratios and operations. GSPO defines the importance ratio based on sequence likelihood and performs sequence-level clipping, rewarding, and optimization.

For efficient model inference and response generation during this process, we rely on the vLLM library.

Let's get started!

## Create virtual environment and Install MaxText dependencies
If you have already completed the [MaxText installation](../../install_maxtext.md), you can skip to the next section for post-training dependencies installations. Otherwise, please install `MaxText` using the following commands before proceeding.
```bash
# 1. Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/AI-Hypercomputer/maxtext.git
cd maxtext

# 2. Create virtual environment
export VENV_NAME=<your virtual env name> # e.g., maxtext_venv
pip install uv
uv venv --python 3.12 --seed $VENV_NAME
source $VENV_NAME/bin/activate

# 3. Install dependencies in editable mode
uv pip install -e .[tpu] --resolution=lowest
install_maxtext_github_deps
```

## Install Post-Training dependencies

### Option 1: From PyPI releases

> **Caution:** RL in MaxText is currently broken with PyPI releases of post-training dependencies. We are working on fixing this and recommend following [Option 2: From Github](#option-2-from-github) in the meantime.

Next, run the following bash script to get all the necessary installations inside the virtual environment (for e.g., `maxtext_venv`).
This will take few minutes. Follow along the installation logs and look out for any issues!

```
bash tools/setup/setup_post_training_requirements.sh
```

Primarily, it installs `Tunix`, and `vllm-tpu` which is [vllm](https://github.com/vllm-project/vllm) and [tpu-inference](https://github.com/vllm-project/tpu-inference) and thereby providing TPU inference for vLLM, with unified JAX and PyTorch support.

### Option 2: From Github

You can also locally git clone [tunix](https://github.com/google/tunix) and install using the instructions [here](https://github.com/google/tunix?tab=readme-ov-file#installation). Similarly install [vllm](https://github.com/vllm-project/vllm) and [tpu-inference](https://github.com/vllm-project/tpu-inference) from source following the instructions [here](https://docs.vllm.ai/projects/tpu/en/latest/getting_started/installation/#install-from-source).

## Setup environment variables

Setup following environment variables before running GRPO/GSPO:

```bash
# -- Model configuration --
export HF_MODEL=<Hugging Face Model> # e.g. 'llama3.1-8b-Instruct'
export MODEL=<MaxText Model> # e.g. 'llama3.1-8b'
export TOKENIZER=<Tokenizer> # e.g. 'meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct'
export HF_TOKEN=<Hugging Face access token>

# -- MaxText configuration --
export BASE_OUTPUT_DIRECTORY=<output directory to store run logs> # e.g., gs://my-bucket/my-output-directory

export RUN_NAME=<name for this run> # e.g., $(date +%Y-%m-%d-%H-%M-%S)
```

## Get your model checkpoint

### Option 1: Using an existing MaxText checkpoint

If you already have a MaxText-compatible model checkpoint, simply set the following environment variable and move on to the next section.
```bash
export MAXTEXT_CKPT_PATH=<gcs path for MaxText checkpoint> # e.g., gs://my-bucket/my-model-checkpoint/0/items
```

### Option 2: Converting from a Hugging Face checkpoint

Otherwise, you can convert a Hugging Face checkpoint to MaxText format using the `src/MaxText/utils/ckpt_conversion/to_maxtext.py` script. This is useful if you have a pre-trained model from Hugging Face that you want to use with MaxText.

First, ensure you have the necessary dependencies installed. Then, run the conversion script on a CPU machine. For large models, it is recommended to use the `--lazy_load_tensors` flag to reduce memory usage during conversion. This command will download the Hugging Face model and convert it to the MaxText format, saving it to the specified GCS bucket.

```bash
python3 -m pip install torch --index-url https://download.pytorch.org/whl/cpu

python3 -m MaxText.utils.ckpt_conversion.to_maxtext src/MaxText/configs/base.yml \
    model_name=${HF_MODEL} \
    hf_access_token=${HF_TOKEN} \
    base_output_directory=${BASE_OUTPUT_DIRECTORY}/${RUN_NAME} \
    scan_layers=True hardware=cpu skip_jax_distributed_system=true

# Example of converting Llama3.1-70B using --lazy_load_tensor=true which uses around 86GB of RAM

python3 -m MaxText.utils.ckpt_conversion.to_maxtext MaxText/configs/base.yml \
    model_name=llama3.1-70b \
    hf_access_token=${HF_TOKEN} \
    base_output_directory=${BASE_OUTPUT_DIRECTORY}/${RUN_NAME} \
    scan_layers=True \
    hardware=cpu skip_jax_distributed_system=true \
    --lazy_load_tensors=true
```

The converted checkpoint will be saved at the following location. Set this environment variable to use it in the following GRPO/GSPO training sessions:
```bash
export MAXTEXT_CKPT_PATH=${BASE_OUTPUT_DIRECTORY}/${RUN_NAME}/0/items
```



## Run GRPO

Run the following command for GRPO:

```
python3 -m src.MaxText.rl.train_rl src/MaxText/configs/rl.yml \
  model_name=${MODEL} \
  tokenizer_path=${TOKENIZER} \
  load_parameters_path=${MAXTEXT_CKPT_PATH} \
  run_name=${RUN_NAME} \
  base_output_directory=${BASE_OUTPUT_DIRECTORY} \
  hf_access_token=${HF_TOKEN}
```

The overview of what this run will do is as follows:

1. We load a policy model and a reference model. Both are copies of the model checkpoint you specified (e.g., `Llama3.1-8b-Instruct`).
2. Evaluate the policy model's performance on GSM8K math reasoning benchmark.
3. Train the policy model using GRPO.
4. Evaluate the policy model's performance on GSM8K math reasoning benchmark after the post-training with GRPO. 

## Run GSPO

Run the following command for GSPO:

```
python3 -m src.MaxText.rl.train_rl src/MaxText/configs/rl.yml \
  model_name=${MODEL} \
  tokenizer_path=${TOKENIZER} \
  load_parameters_path=${MAXTEXT_CKPT_PATH} \
  run_name=${RUN_NAME} \
  base_output_directory=${BASE_OUTPUT_DIRECTORY} \
  hf_access_token=${HF_TOKEN} \
  loss_algo=gspo-token
```

The overview of what this run will do is as follows:

1. We load a policy model and a reference model. Both are copies of the model checkpoint you specified (e.g., `Llama3.1-8b-Instruct`).
2. Evaluate the policy model's performance on GSM8K math reasoning benchmark.
3. Train the policy model using GSPO.
4. Evaluate the policy model's performance on GSM8K math reasoning benchmark after the post-training with GSPO.
