docs/tutorials/posttraining/sft_on_multi_host.md, before:

<!--
 # Copyright 2023–2025 Google LLC
#
# Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
# you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
# You may obtain a copy of the License at
#
#    https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
#
# Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
# distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
# WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
# See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
# limitations under the License.
 -->

# SFT on multi-host TPUs

Supervised fine-tuning (SFT) is a process where a pre-trained large language model is fine-tuned on a labeled dataset to adapt the model to perform better on specific tasks.

This tutorial demonstrates step-by-step instructions for setting up the multi-host TPU environment and then training the model on the Hugging Face dataset using SFT. In this tutorial we use a multi-host TPU such as `v6e-256`.

We use [Tunix](https://github.com/google/tunix), a JAX-based library designed for post-training tasks, to perform SFT.

Let's get started!

## 1. Build and upload MaxText Docker image

This section guides you through cloning the MaxText repository, building MaxText Docker image with dependencies, and uploading the docker image to your project's Artifact Registry.

### 1.1. Clone the MaxText repository

```bash
git clone https://github.com/google/maxtext.git
cd maxtext
```

### 1.2. Build MaxText Docker image

Before building the Docker image, authenticate to [Google Artifact Registry](https://docs.cloud.google.com/artifact-registry/docs/docker/authentication#gcloud-helper) for permission to push your images and other access.

```bash
# Authenticate your user account for gcloud CLI access
gcloud auth login
# Configure application default credentials for Docker and other tools
gcloud auth application-default login
# Configure Docker credentials and test your access
gcloud auth configure-docker
docker run hello-world
```

Then run the following command to create a local Docker image named `maxtext_base_image`. This build process takes approximately 10 to 15 minutes.

```bash
bash dependencies/scripts/docker_build_dependency_image.sh WORKFLOW=post-training
```

### 1.3. Upload the Docker image to Artifact Registry

> **Note:** You will need the [**Artifact Registry Writer**](https://docs.cloud.google.com/artifact-registry/docs/access-control#permissions) role to push Docker images to your project's Artifact Registry and to allow the cluster to pull them during workload execution. If you don't have this permission, contact your project administrator to grant you this role through "Google Cloud Console -> IAM -> Grant access".

```bash
export DOCKER_IMAGE_NAME=<Docker Image Name>
bash dependencies/scripts/docker_upload_runner.sh CLOUD_IMAGE_NAME=$DOCKER_IMAGE_NAME
```

The `docker_upload_runner.sh` script uploads your Docker image to Artifact Registry.

## 2. Install XPK

Install XPK by following the instructions in the [official documentation](https://github.com/AI-Hypercomputer/xpk/blob/main/docs/installation.md).

## 3. Create GKE cluster

Use a pathways ready GKE cluster as described [here](https://docs.cloud.google.com/ai-hypercomputer/docs/workloads/pathways-on-cloud/create-gke-cluster).

## 4. Environment configuration

```bash
# -- Google Cloud Configuration --
export PROJECT=<Google Cloud Project ID>
export CLUSTER_NAME=<Name of GKE Cluster>
export ZONE=<GKE Cluster Zone>

# -- Workload Configuration --
export WORKLOAD_NAME=<Name of Workload> # e.g., sft-$(date +%s)
export TPU_TYPE=<TPU Type> # e.g., v6e-256
export TPU_SLICE=<number of slices>
export DOCKER_IMAGE="gcr.io/${PROJECT}/${DOCKER_IMAGE_NAME}"

# -- MaxText Configuration --
export OUTPUT_PATH=<GCS Path for Output/Logs> # e.g., gs://my-bucket/my-output-directory
export STEPS=<Fine-Tuning Steps> # e.g., 1000
export HF_TOKEN=<Hugging Face Access Token>

# -- Model Configuration --
export MODEL_NAME=<Model Name> # e.g., deepseek3-671b
export TOKENIZER_PATH=<Model Tokenizer> # e.g., deepseek-ai/DeepSeek-V3

# -- Dataset configuration --
export DATASET_NAME=<Hugging Face Dataset Name> # e.g., HuggingFaceH4/ultrachat_200k
export TRAIN_SPLIT=<Data Split for Train> # e.g., train_sft
export TRAIN_DATA_COLUMNS=<Data Columns to Train on> # e.g., ['messages']
```

## 5. Get MaxText model checkpoint

This section explains how to prepare your model checkpoint for use with MaxText. You have two options: using an existing MaxText checkpoint or converting a Hugging Face checkpoint.

### Option 1: Using an existing MaxText checkpoint

If you already have a MaxText-compatible model checkpoint, simply set the following environment variable and move on to the next section.

```bash
export MODEL_CHECKPOINT_PATH=<gcs path for MaxText checkpoint> # e.g., gs://my-bucket/my-model-checkpoint/0/items
```

**Note:** Make sure that `MODEL_CHECKPOINT_PATH` has the checkpoints created using the correct storage flags:

- **For SFT with McJAX:** `checkpoint_storage_use_zarr3=True` and `checkpoint_storage_use_ocdbt=True`.
- **For SFT with Pathways:** `checkpoint_storage_use_zarr3=False` and `checkpoint_storage_use_ocdbt=False`.

### Option 2: Converting a Hugging Face checkpoint

If your model checkpoint is from Hugging Face, you need to run a conversion script to make it MaxText-compatible.

1. **Set the Output Path:** First, define where the converted MaxText checkpoint will be saved. For example:

```bash
export MODEL_CHECKPOINT_DIRECTORY=${OUTPUT_PATH}/maxtext-checkpoint
```

2. **Run the Conversion Script:** Execute the following commands on a CPU machine that downloads the specified HuggingFace model and converts its weights into the MaxText format. This command will download the HuggingFace model and convert it to the MaxText format, saving it to the specified GCS bucket. The conversion script only supports official versions of models from HuggingFace. To see the specific models and versions currently supported for conversion, please refer to the `HF_IDS` dictionary in the MaxText utility file [here](https://github.com/AI-Hypercomputer/maxtext/blob/main/src/MaxText/utils/ckpt_conversion/utils/utils.py).

```bash
USE_ZARR3=<Flag to use zarr3> # True to run SFT with McJAX, False to run SFT with Pathways
USE_OCDBT=<Flag to use ocdbt> # True to run SFT with McJAX, False to run SFT with Pathways

python3 -m pip install torch --index-url https://download.pytorch.org/whl/cpu

# For large models, it is recommended to set `--lazy_load_tensors` flag to reduce memory usage during conversion
python3 -m MaxText.utils.ckpt_conversion.to_maxtext src/MaxText/configs/base.yml \
    model_name=$MODEL_NAME \
    hf_access_token=$HF_TOKEN \
    base_output_directory=$MODEL_CHECKPOINT_DIRECTORY \
    scan_layers=True \
    checkpoint_storage_use_zarr3=$USE_ZARR3 checkpoint_storage_use_ocdbt=$USE_OCDBT \
    skip_jax_distributed_system=True --lazy_load_tensors=True
```

3. **Use the Converted Checkpoint:** Set the following environment variable to use the converted checkpoint:

```bash
export MODEL_CHECKPOINT_PATH=${MODEL_CHECKPOINT_DIRECTORY}/0/items
```

## 6. Submit workload on GKE cluster

This section provides the command to run SFT on a GKE cluster.

### 6.1. SFT with Multi-Controller JAX (McJAX)

```bash
xpk workload create \
--cluster=${CLUSTER_NAME} \
--project=${PROJECT} \
--zone=${ZONE} \
--docker-image=${DOCKER_IMAGE} \
--workload=${WORKLOAD_NAME} \
--tpu-type=${TPU_TYPE} \
--num-slices=${TPU_SLICE} \
--command "python3 -m maxtext.trainers.post_train.sft.train_sft src/MaxText/configs/sft.yml run_name=$WORKLOAD_NAME base_output_directory=$OUTPUT_PATH model_name=$MODEL_NAME load_parameters_path=$MODEL_CHECKPOINT_PATH hf_access_token=$HF_TOKEN tokenizer_path=$TOKENIZER_PATH per_device_batch_size=1 steps=$STEPS profiler=xplane hf_path=$DATASET_NAME train_split=$TRAIN_SPLIT train_data_columns=$TRAIN_DATA_COLUMNS"
```

Once the fine-tuning is completed, you can access your model checkpoints at `$OUTPUT_PATH/$WORKLOAD_NAME/checkpoints`.

### 6.2. SFT with Pathways

```bash
xpk workload create-pathways \
--cluster=${CLUSTER_NAME} \
--project=${PROJECT} \
--zone=${ZONE} \
--docker-image=${DOCKER_IMAGE} \
--workload=${WORKLOAD_NAME} \
--tpu-type=${TPU_TYPE} \
--num-slices=${TPU_SLICE} \
--command="JAX_PLATFORMS=proxy JAX_BACKEND_TARGET=grpc://127.0.0.1:29000 ENABLE_PATHWAYS_PERSISTENCE=1 python3 -m maxtext.trainers.post_train.sft.train_sft src/MaxText/configs/sft.yml run_name=$WORKLOAD_NAME base_output_directory=$OUTPUT_PATH model_name=$MODEL_NAME load_parameters_path=$MODEL_CHECKPOINT_PATH hf_access_token=$HF_TOKEN tokenizer_path=$TOKENIZER_PATH per_device_batch_size=1 steps=$STEPS profiler=xplane checkpoint_storage_use_zarr3=False checkpoint_storage_use_ocdbt=False enable_single_controller=True"
```

Once the fine-tuning is completed, you can access your model checkpoints at `$OUTPUT_PATH/$WORKLOAD_NAME/checkpoints`.

Commit message:

docs: add checkpoint conversion in tutorials

docs/tutorials/posttraining/sft_on_multi_host.md, after:

<!--
 # Copyright 2023–2025 Google LLC
#
# Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
# you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
# You may obtain a copy of the License at
#
#    https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
#
# Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
# distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
# WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
# See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
# limitations under the License.
 -->

# SFT on multi-host TPUs

Supervised fine-tuning (SFT) is a process where a pre-trained large language model is fine-tuned on a labeled dataset to adapt the model to perform better on specific tasks.

This tutorial demonstrates step-by-step instructions for setting up the multi-host TPU environment and then training the model on the Hugging Face dataset using SFT. In this tutorial we use a multi-host TPU such as `v6e-256`.

We use [Tunix](https://github.com/google/tunix), a JAX-based library designed for post-training tasks, to perform SFT.

Let's get started!

## 1. Build and upload MaxText Docker image

This section guides you through cloning the MaxText repository, building MaxText Docker image with dependencies, and uploading the docker image to your project's Artifact Registry.

### 1.1. Clone the MaxText repository

```bash
git clone https://github.com/google/maxtext.git
cd maxtext
```

### 1.2. Build MaxText Docker image

Before building the Docker image, authenticate to [Google Artifact Registry](https://docs.cloud.google.com/artifact-registry/docs/docker/authentication#gcloud-helper) for permission to push your images and other access.

```bash
# Authenticate your user account for gcloud CLI access
gcloud auth login
# Configure application default credentials for Docker and other tools
gcloud auth application-default login
# Configure Docker credentials and test your access
gcloud auth configure-docker
docker run hello-world
```

Then run the following command to create a local Docker image named `maxtext_base_image`. This build process takes approximately 10 to 15 minutes.

```bash
bash dependencies/scripts/docker_build_dependency_image.sh WORKFLOW=post-training
```

### 1.3. Upload the Docker image to Artifact Registry

> **Note:** You will need the [**Artifact Registry Writer**](https://docs.cloud.google.com/artifact-registry/docs/access-control#permissions) role to push Docker images to your project's Artifact Registry and to allow the cluster to pull them during workload execution. If you don't have this permission, contact your project administrator to grant you this role through "Google Cloud Console -> IAM -> Grant access".

```bash
export DOCKER_IMAGE_NAME=<Docker Image Name>
bash dependencies/scripts/docker_upload_runner.sh CLOUD_IMAGE_NAME=$DOCKER_IMAGE_NAME
```

The `docker_upload_runner.sh` script uploads your Docker image to Artifact Registry.

## 2. Install XPK

Install XPK by following the instructions in the [official documentation](https://github.com/AI-Hypercomputer/xpk/blob/main/docs/installation.md).

## 3. Create GKE cluster

Use a pathways ready GKE cluster as described [here](https://docs.cloud.google.com/ai-hypercomputer/docs/workloads/pathways-on-cloud/create-gke-cluster).

## 4. Environment configuration

```bash
# -- Google Cloud Configuration --
export PROJECT=<Google Cloud Project ID>
export CLUSTER_NAME=<Name of GKE Cluster>
export ZONE=<GKE Cluster Zone>

# -- Workload Configuration --
export WORKLOAD_NAME=<Name of Workload> # e.g., sft-$(date +%s)
export TPU_TYPE=<TPU Type> # e.g., v6e-256
export TPU_SLICE=<number of slices>
export DOCKER_IMAGE="gcr.io/${PROJECT}/${DOCKER_IMAGE_NAME}"

# -- MaxText Configuration --
export OUTPUT_PATH=<GCS Path for Output/Logs> # e.g., gs://my-bucket/my-output-directory
export STEPS=<Fine-Tuning Steps> # e.g., 1000
export HF_TOKEN=<Hugging Face Access Token>

# -- Model Configuration --
export MODEL_NAME=<Model Name> # e.g., deepseek3-671b
export TOKENIZER_PATH=<Model Tokenizer> # e.g., deepseek-ai/DeepSeek-V3

# -- Dataset configuration --
export DATASET_NAME=<Hugging Face Dataset Name> # e.g., HuggingFaceH4/ultrachat_200k
export TRAIN_SPLIT=<Data Split for Train> # e.g., train_sft
export TRAIN_DATA_COLUMNS=<Data Columns to Train on> # e.g., ['messages']
```

## 5. Get MaxText model checkpoint

This section explains how to prepare your model checkpoint for use with MaxText. You have two options: using an existing MaxText checkpoint or converting a Hugging Face checkpoint.

### Option 1: Using an existing MaxText checkpoint

If you already have a MaxText-compatible model checkpoint, simply set the following environment variable and move on to the next section.

```bash
export MODEL_CHECKPOINT_PATH=<gcs path for MaxText checkpoint> # e.g., gs://my-bucket/my-model-checkpoint/0/items
```

**Note:** Make sure that `MODEL_CHECKPOINT_PATH` has the checkpoints created using the correct storage flags:

- **For SFT with McJAX:** `checkpoint_storage_use_zarr3=True` and `checkpoint_storage_use_ocdbt=True`.
- **For SFT with Pathways:** `checkpoint_storage_use_zarr3=False` and `checkpoint_storage_use_ocdbt=False`.

### Option 2: Converting a Hugging Face checkpoint

Refer the steps in [Hugging Face to MaxText](../../guides/checkpointing_solutions/convert_checkpoint.md#hugging-face-to-maxtext) to convert a hugging face checkpoint to MaxText. Make sure you have correct checkpoint files converted and saved. Similar as Option 1, you can set the following environment and move on.

```bash
export MODEL_CHECKPOINT_PATH=<gcs path for MaxText checkpoint> # gs://my-bucket/my-checkpoint-directory/0/items
```

## 6. Submit workload on GKE cluster

This section provides the command to run SFT on a GKE cluster.

### 6.1. SFT with Multi-Controller JAX (McJAX)

```bash
xpk workload create \
--cluster=${CLUSTER_NAME} \
--project=${PROJECT} \
--zone=${ZONE} \
--docker-image=${DOCKER_IMAGE} \
--workload=${WORKLOAD_NAME} \
--tpu-type=${TPU_TYPE} \
--num-slices=${TPU_SLICE} \
--command "python3 -m maxtext.trainers.post_train.sft.train_sft src/MaxText/configs/sft.yml run_name=$WORKLOAD_NAME base_output_directory=$OUTPUT_PATH model_name=$MODEL_NAME load_parameters_path=$MODEL_CHECKPOINT_PATH hf_access_token=$HF_TOKEN tokenizer_path=$TOKENIZER_PATH per_device_batch_size=1 steps=$STEPS profiler=xplane hf_path=$DATASET_NAME train_split=$TRAIN_SPLIT train_data_columns=$TRAIN_DATA_COLUMNS"
```

Once the fine-tuning is completed, you can access your model checkpoints at `$OUTPUT_PATH/$WORKLOAD_NAME/checkpoints`.

### 6.2. SFT with Pathways

```bash
xpk workload create-pathways \
--cluster=${CLUSTER_NAME} \
--project=${PROJECT} \
--zone=${ZONE} \
--docker-image=${DOCKER_IMAGE} \
--workload=${WORKLOAD_NAME} \
--tpu-type=${TPU_TYPE} \
--num-slices=${TPU_SLICE} \
--command="JAX_PLATFORMS=proxy JAX_BACKEND_TARGET=grpc://127.0.0.1:29000 ENABLE_PATHWAYS_PERSISTENCE=1 python3 -m maxtext.trainers.post_train.sft.train_sft src/MaxText/configs/sft.yml run_name=$WORKLOAD_NAME base_output_directory=$OUTPUT_PATH model_name=$MODEL_NAME load_parameters_path=$MODEL_CHECKPOINT_PATH hf_access_token=$HF_TOKEN tokenizer_path=$TOKENIZER_PATH per_device_batch_size=1 steps=$STEPS profiler=xplane checkpoint_storage_use_zarr3=False checkpoint_storage_use_ocdbt=False enable_single_controller=True"
```

Once the fine-tuning is completed, you can access your model checkpoints at `$OUTPUT_PATH/$WORKLOAD_NAME/checkpoints`.
