docs/development.md, before:

```{include} ../CONTRIBUTING.md
```

## Contributing documentation

### Building the documentation locally (optional)

If you are writing documentation for MaxText, you may want to preview the documentation site locally. First, make sure you install the necessary dependencies. You can do this by navigating to your local clone of the MaxText repo and running:
```bash
pip install -r requirements_docs.txt
```

Once the dependencies are installed, you can navigate to the `docs/` folder and run:

```bash
sphinx-build -b html . _build/html
```

This will generate the documentation in the `docs/_build/html` directory.

If you are adding a new document, make sure it is included in the `toctree` directive corresponding to the section where the new document should live. For example, if adding a new tutorial, make sure it is listed in [the `docs/tutorials.md`](https://github.com/AI-Hypercomputer/maxtext/blob/7070e8eecbea8951c8e5281219ce797c8df1441f/docs/tutorials.md?plain=1#L38).

### Documentation deployment

The MaxText documentation is deployed to https://maxtext.readthedocs.io on any successful merge to the main branch.

Commit message:

Add information about Sphinx and MyST

docs/development.md, after:

```{include} ../CONTRIBUTING.md
```

## Contributing documentation

The MaxText documentation website is built using [Sphinx](https://www.sphinx-doc.org) and [MyST](https://myst-parser.readthedocs.io/en/latest/). Documents are written in [MyST Markdown syntax](https://myst-parser.readthedocs.io/en/latest/syntax/typography.html#syntax-core).

### Building the documentation locally (optional)

If you are writing documentation for MaxText, you may want to preview the documentation site locally. First, make sure you install the necessary dependencies. You can do this by navigating to your local clone of the MaxText repo and running:
```bash
pip install -r requirements_docs.txt
```

Once the dependencies are installed, you can navigate to the `docs/` folder and run:

```bash
sphinx-build -b html . _build/html
```

This will generate the documentation in the `docs/_build/html` directory.

If you are adding a new document, make sure it is included in the `toctree` directive corresponding to the section where the new document should live. For example, if adding a new tutorial, make sure it is listed in [the `docs/tutorials.md`](https://github.com/AI-Hypercomputer/maxtext/blob/7070e8eecbea8951c8e5281219ce797c8df1441f/docs/tutorials.md?plain=1#L38).

### Documentation deployment

The MaxText documentation is deployed to https://maxtext.readthedocs.io on any successful merge to the main branch.
